(up-tempo drumbeat)
One question that has left archaeologists and historians
alike confused is the evidence that the further
we go back into our human history,
the more advanced some of the cultures seem to be.
This led author Lucy Wyatt into an exploration of
these cycles in which the rise and fall of empires
drives our evolution and devolution.
In her book "Approaching Chaos" she also
speaks of the Roman Empire as the fall of
humankind's spiritual consciousness.
(up-tempo drumbeat)
Lucy, you've written this very well-researched book
called "Approaching Chaos" and it seems the starting point
seems very important here which is there have been high
civilizations in the past that seem to have disappeared.
And this is very important for us to know about at
this point, which is a large turning point for civilization.
Let's start with the notion that,
what your research is indicating is that cities really
were the preferred structure of the day in ancient
times where advanced cultures existed.
It wasn't farming moving into the city
but the city moving outward.
Now let's just choose that as a starting point.
Sure yeah, that's a really good starting point because we,
as far as I can tell, we've been telling ourselves
the wrong story since the end of the Ice Age.
We've been telling ourselves a story that farming
is an experiment, that Neolithic man was throwing
a few seeds around and that cities grew from
exchange of surplus, agricultural surplus.
And when you really look at the archaeological record
that's not what it shows, it really isn't.
And I mean I could go into more detail but perhaps
we haven't quite got enough time for that.
But the point is that as far as I can see,
the more rational explanation is that agriculture as we
know it came out of cities and not the other way around.
And that what we have to understand is that cities arrived
pre-planned, they weren't organic marketplaces that grew.
For example a very well-respected person who
wrote about this a bit called Jaketa Haux,
she makes the point that the first people
in cities were priests, not farmers.
So she knew that something,
I mean she didn't understand why,
she couldn't see what the whole point of it was but she
knew that there was something different going on there.
And really that, going back to those origins should alert
us to something that was going on that doesn't make any
sense to us and we should ask ourselves the question,
"Why did this happen the way it did?"
And really go back to the beginning
and think about it quite differently.
That's really why I've written the book, to explore that.
It does seem backward because
what you're talking about in this book,
and you're using many different points as evidence.
And one of them is from archaeological remnants
of pottery shards and such that actually some of the more
beautiful and sophisticated work is the further back you go,
it's not in recent times.
We seem to have somehow devolved
in our understandings, in our culture.
Our cultures have devolved rather than evolved.
Well we've told ourselves the story that everything
evolves and everything is progress and in order to justify
the fact that we feel that we are the most advanced,
we are the most progressive.
And we've kind of told ourselves this as propaganda really.
Which is, that way of thinking has blinkered us to
the fact that these people were very sophisticated.
And if you go to the British Museum and you look at
the Halafian pottery and so forth,
you can see that it is exquisite.
And even the archaeologists talk about when pottery was
starting to be made on a wheel, it declined in standards.
That earlier pottery, which wasn't made on a wheel
is much finer and more beautiful and you can see
that these things that people were clearly taught,
they were taught that the original things were
much higher standard and then they declined.
So that in itself, even if you just look at the
evidence in the museums should make you go,
"Hang on a minute, what's going on here?
Something strange is happening."
And certainly the artifacts that surrounded
the royal families of the day, I mean the pharaohs and such.
Exquisite jewelry making, beautiful little parlor games
that they used to play to amuse themselves
in the afternoon and that sort of thing.
Fine furniture making, crafts that are all but lost now.
Absolutely, and if you go to somewhere like Saqqara
and the mud brick mastabas where the tombs are in Saqqara,
the bas-reliefs that show the scenes of everyday life
that take the pharaoh unto another place,
of the donkeys and things.
They are so beautiful, they're so three-dimensional.
You can see the veins on the donkeys,
and these are the things that are the oldest in Egypt.
So it's not like things have got better over time.
So it's this lack of evolution that should really make us
feel very questioning about that ancient past indeed.
Yes, and we're looking at also a different view.
Let's just start with Egypt because it's recent history,
say in the last six, 7,000 years.
Excuse me. (coughing)
Just starting there.
There are several things that have popped out in your book
that intrigued me in particular but
the notion of the work of another female author
we were talking about a little while ago,
the evidence as to what the slaves,
those thought to have been the slaves were treated like
is really very different than what we depict
certainly in our religious texts, for example.
It's nothing like that at all.
Let's start with the day-to-day population in Egypt
of those who were providing the services.
Right, well the problem that we have for a start
is that most of what we understand about Egypt
comes through the Greeks, and it's only if the Greeks knew
about something that we've kinda been told about it.
And quite often the Greeks misunderstood what was going on
because they weren't around at the time say,
of the building of the Great Pyramid.
They didn't come to Egypt for several thousand years later.
So if we're gonna base our view of a slave society
on what the Greeks have told us,
or Herodotus or whoever it is,
then that in itself is gonna make us make mistakes.
We're not going to get to the right place.
But take for example the building of the Great Pyramid,
I think we were talking about that earlier.
These documentaries and the evidence,
the archaeological evidence of the builders' villages
which clearly show that these people were very well-treated.
That they lived in proper houses,
that they had very high standards of food.
For example they were allowed the best cuts of meat
that only usually the aristocrats in Egypt had.
Breweries, bakeries, that kind of thing.
And also even more important, they had medical assistance.
The way that their injuries have healed shows,
in their skeletal remains shows that they actually
received medical attention long before they died.
These injuries have healed and they've been
quite severe injuries in some cases.
So there's no evidence that these people were treated
cruelly at all and it's in totally our concept of a slave
in a kind of Roman-Greek sense of cruelty
and forced labor and that kind of thing.
So we're putting onto the ancient Egyptians our
own prejudices basically and there is no evidence
that that image is true at all.
And then you have to get into then,
well this gets into a lot of other information such as
what some of the genuine technologies that were used in
the day or employed in the day to build the pyramids were.
Yes.
In which case it wouldn't have required
that kind of manual labor that's depicted in religious
texts for example as to, or in as you say ancient
Roman texts as to what the Egyptians were.
That would just be rendered inaccurate
and meaningless to begin with.
Yes, absolutely.
I mean the ancient Egyptians didn't even have wheelbarrows.
They didn't have pulleys and things like that.
They didn't have those technologies
because they didn't need to.
They had more sophisticated technology available
to them so, and we don't need to go down that road,
there are many other books written on that.
And another thing is that again, this whole notion
of evolution, evolution of language and so forth.
And as you point out, the Egyptian hieroglyphics,
which we have not yet decoded.
There have been attempts to do some surface types
of decoding but the real thing has not been decoded yet.
That appears fully formed in it's most ancient,
the most ancient remnants of it are fully formed,
it's not a thing that evolved.
Absolutely, absolutely.
In the same way as the things at Saqqara don't show
any decline, they show that the early stuff is the best.
In the same way as you look at the earliest hieroglyphs,
even 2,000 years later they haven't changed.
They're still the pure thing and they are the total
concept and they are the total language.
There's no kind of greater additions that occur later on,
and so it is very hard to know where these things come from.
That's very true and wouldn't like to hazard a guess.
I mean there is some thoughts that they're very
much linked to the cuneiform of Mesopotamia,
and there are various people who think that the
Egyptians that arrived in Egypt at about 3,100 B.C.
actually came from Mesopotamia.
But they didn't start off with wet clay and a pressed
stylus making cuneiform, that the Mesopotamians.
They started off straight off with ink and papyrus
and carving straight into stone.
So already they had a different technological approach to
their writing and there is no evolution in it, as you say.
So yes, another thing.
And I think it's important to focus on Egypt
here because what we've been taught in the West
we think has originated in Greco-Roman times.
Yes.
And architecture, mathematics and so forth
when this was all Egyptian knowledge that had been passed
on and maybe give a couple examples of some of the key
players in Greece who had actually learned in Egypt.
Well Pythagoras, he's the most important one and he
actually claims to have spent 25 years in Egyptian temples.
I mean it's only because we kind of think everything
starts with the Greeks, and how ridiculous is that?
You know at about 600, 500 B.C. or whenever it is,
suddenly the Greeks know everything.
Well there's no evidence that they evolved that information,
and highly sophisticated information.
I mean I think one of the major problems is that the people
who have looked at Egypt in the past have mostly been,
without wishing to sound rude,
have mostly been a branch of artistry.
They've not been technicians, they've not been engineers,
they have not necessarily been mathematicians
or whoever it is.
So they haven't understood just what a high level Egypt is,
and because we understand Greece and Rome through
the language, because we've inherited their languages,
and we still learn Greek and Latin anyway even today,
that's the starting point for us.
So we think that's where it starts but
actually think about it.
It's highly developed, highly sophisticated stuff
and it suddenly appears in Greece?
No, doesn't make any sense.
Doesn't make any sense.
Let's go back to another time,
a time that I think is a really pivotal time in
Egyptian history because this starts carrying us over
into even Christianity and this was the time of the pharaoh
Akhenaten and the glorious temple that was built.
This was a very controversial character historically
because there was an attempt on his part it appears
to reestablish a natural law, a natural connection with
the sun and everything that the sun means and
what it feeds the planet by way of information.
Or as he called it, the power behind the sun.
The power behind the sun.
Which is the Aten.
Yes which is very, very interesting.
And he built this beautiful city, just a gleaming example
in terms of architecture and beauty called Akhetaten, right?
Yes, yes.
And so let's talk about him and what happened
there and what was going on around him politically
and the end of that and what it started leading to,
and into the Essenes if you don't mind.
Yes well the thing that's interesting about him is that as
you say, he wanted to get back to some basics, as it were.
And I think as in a lot of revolutions,
they start off with very good intentions
but they can easily be hijacked.
And although one thing that may look like a good thing
that he did in terms of closing down all the other temples
around Egypt, because at the time when he was around,
each temple was like a little mini power center.
It had its own deities and so forth even though
the whole thing could kind of come together to
be united in the person of the pharaoh,
say for example at the time of the Heb Sed festival.
That was something he wanted to change.
So in a way what he did effectively was to
remove his own checks and balances,
these own little other power centers, and he removed
those in order to get back to this basic thing.
So that made him already immediately politically
very vulnerable because he's removing these other things
that could keep each other in balance because they could
fight against each other if there was a kind of tension.
So he probably thought he was doing the right thing
and he probably thought he was getting back to a purer
form of acknowledgment of the power of the sun.
It's very difficult, this word worship,
what does it really mean?
Yes.
Instead of awareness or honoring and using it literally,
having it as a useful aspect of our lives.
Exactly, so that's very hard.
But what is kind of interesting in terms of how that
really starts off a kind of whole monotheistic thing,
because it's just the power of the sun that matters to him.
So it's one god in that sense,
is that at the time that he was alive there were these
Jewish groups who existed in Egypt,
what they refer to as the Habiru.
Habiru coming down to us obviously as Hebrews,
and they has arrived in Egypt quite a long time
previously with the Hyksos, as they're called.
And Habiru basically means people from the other side of the
river and in this case it's the other side of the Euphrates.
They'd come down from northern Turkey or northern
Syria rather from the northern part of the Euphrates
a long time earlier and they had infiltrated themselves
into the Egyptian royal household.
And there's a long of evidence say for example Joseph,
the great Jewish patriarch,
was a member of the Egyptian royal household.
And so these people were very close to Akhenaten
and it's said that he used one of their priests to run
his big temple in Akhetaten for example.
Now when his whole thing collapses,
either he's murdered or assassinated or whatever happens.
He was taken out, right?
He's taken out, whatever happens,
the whole thing starts to collapse.
Then these Jewish people who are there at
the time of the Exodus, all of that.
The Mose, the Moses, Mose in this context meaning "son of."
So whoever it was that was guiding out the Jews
was son of somebody, cause Mose meaning in,
Egyptian word meaning "son" as in Tutmoses, son of Tut.
And what is quite possible is that there was a group
of these people who got left behind on Elephantine
Island in the Upper Nile near Aswan,
and this Jewish community stayed there for a very long time.
They were still there when the Persians invaded Egypt
in about 600 B.C. or so.
So if you assume that their Exodus happens, I'm not sure
the exact dates but say around 1200 B.C. or whatever.
So possibly for a period of about 600 years
these people have been left behind.
They don't have all the same festivals that the other
Jewish people have and they don't have the Exodus festivals
in particular, so that's in itself kinda significant.
But they do have others that are in parallel and then
what is also then possible is that these people arrive
at some later point in Israel, in Canaan, in Palestine.
And it is possible that these people found themselves,
built themselves a community at Qumran,
which is on the Dead Sea not far from Jerusalem,
and they have become known to us as the Essenes.
So this is quite a lot of different time periods because
you've got Akenhaten back in whenever it is--
1800.
Or even earlier, whenever.
And then you have the Exodus, you have these people leaving.
Some leaving, and some staying on Elephantine Island.
The Persians arriving and finding them still there
doing these strange variations of Jewish festivals,
and then later on their arriving in Canaan,
in Palestine in about probably the second century B.C.
And the point about it is is that we only get to
know them through the Dead Sea Scrolls, which are
discovered in whenever it was, 1945, in recent history.
Which are all buried in a cave off the Dead Sea and one
of these Dead Sea Scrolls is called the Copper Scroll.
Now it's a man called Robert Feather who's actually done
the work on this and he has identified that there are Greek
letters which spell the name Akhenaten on this scroll,
so that in itself is kinda quite strange.
Interesting.
And one of the big controversial things about this
Copper Scroll is it describes a treasure which is buried
and temples that are destroyed and this kind of thing,
and it has always been assumed that this treasure related
to the treasure of the temple in Jerusalem.
But there's no correlations because it describes a
great big river and it describes all sorts of things.
And what Robert Feather has worked out is that the city
that this scroll describes correlates almost perfectly
with Akhetaten, the city of Akhenaten.
Yes.
And down to the very fact that it describes a certain
weight of gold in this scroll that's been hidden in
a particular place and archaeologically discovered,
there has been discoveries of a certain amount
of gold that corresponds exactly to this amount
described in the Copper Scroll.
So this really changes the face of modern,
what has developed into the modern religions.
Yes.
So I've read this in other books as well
that there's a certain amount of evidence when,
just take the House of David for example.
Right.
The origins would be?
Well the House of David, you have to go back again
back to the time of Akhenhaten and so forth.
Because here I've taken the work of a man
called Ahmed Osman, who is an Egyptian writer,
and he's come up with some very, very interesting ideas.
And part of his ideas are that David and Solomon, who are
normally described as 10th century B.C. Jewish kings.
He says there is no historical evidence for these
people being Jewish or being kings at that time.
He says these were actually Egyptian pharaohs.
He says that David is Tutmoses the Third
and Solomon is Amenhotep the Fourth.
And so in fact, and David did, Tutmoses the Third
did fight campaigns that happened in Jerusalem.
Armageddon, Har Megiddo is a place outside Jerusalem
and there were these campaigns that were fought,
and it's more than likely that Jerusalem was a city
of Tutmoses the Third and that there is some of
the old building there underneath the great
thing of the Rock, you know the Dome of the Rock.
Dome of the Rock, yes.
Is very like Egyptian building.
The slabs that are there,
the big heavy slabs that are cut so perfectly and so forth
are very similar to what you'll find in Egypt and he also
fought campaigns right up to that northern Euphrates part
where the original Hebrews came from, the land of Mitanni.
And it's said in the Bible he had an empire
from the Nile to the Euphrates.
Well Tutmoses the Third did have an empire from the Nile
to the Euphrates but then no Jewish king actually did.
So there are an awful lot of reasons for thinking
that David and Solomon.
And the Solomon thing is interesting because
that's a name meaning "peace" and Amenhotep
had many diplomatic treaties to keep peace.
And also his temple has never been found,
they're still thinking it's in Jerusalem.
But the description of his temple and his temple complex
corresponds almost exactly to the Heb Sed festival courts
that Amenhotep the Fourth built at Luxor in Egypt.
Including down to the forests of Lebanon court where
these big trees were brought, cedars of Lebanon by
the Phoenicians but to Egypt, not to Jerusalem.
So there are a lot of correlations there and a lot
of misunderstanding, kind of propaganda really
of warping the whole historical thing.
And so really what you're ending up with is
Akhenaten with his monotheistic type thing,
these Hebrews who are clearly very influenced by him.
And then when the Essenes, these people possibly
from Elephantine Island arrive in Palestine,
there are already Jewish people there.
They've already created their own temples because
they came out through the Exodus.
But what happens with the Akhenaten Essenes is because
they stayed in Egypt the longest, they think they've been
closest to the true originator, who they see as Akhenaten,
and that therefore they feel morally superior
to these Jews who are in Jerusalem.
And that creates a huge amount of tension between
Qumran and Jerusalem because they think that they've
deteriorated in their festivals and they don't
keep the right calendar and all this.
Haven't got the right number of courtyards in their temple
and all of that kind of thing so there's a lot of tension
between the Essenes in the Dead Sea part and the
Jews and the priesthood in Jerusalem.
And yet the being who is thought to
be known as Jesus was also thought to be
heavily influenced by the Essenes.
Well I think that's, there's different views on that.
And part of what I've tried to do is basically stick to
as good a historical evidence as you can find.
And I have to say one of the things that shocked me
in my own research is I couldn't actually find any
historical evidence for when Jesus existed.
That's not to say he didn't exist but that's to say
I couldn't find it in references to Roman documents
or references in the Essenes' documents either.
Because the Essenes, they clearly occupied Qumran
at the time when he's supposed to have been alive,
because they were there from the Second Century B.C.
to the Second Century A.D.
So that clearly follows that period when
he should've been there so I have a slightly
controversial view of all of that.
Well, and the Romans were really
well-developed in terms of administration.
Yes, they kept very good records.
Very good records.
Exactly.
And so you're saying as I recall from the book,
there is no record of this being having been there nor
gone through what they had, in the Roman records as well.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah there's no record in the Jewish records
and there's no record in the Essenes' records.
There's no record in,
the Dead Sea Scrolls don't mention him at all
and there's no record in the Roman records.
But the Copper Scroll for example does refer to the
House of Yeshu, so that could be another word for Jesus,
which was in Akhetaten.
So it could be that he was a wise teacher who maybe
even existed at the time of Akhenaten, who knows?
Maybe he was the Moses.
I'm just saying that now but he could've been the one
that led them out into Palestine, I don't know.
But the point is is that what one has to remember
is all of this Christian story is written so much later,
and when it's written later it's written with all the
prejudices and the agenda of those later writers.
Yes.
So one should never forget that.
We kind of fool ourselves into thinking,
"Oh it's the Biblical truth, it's the Gospel of Truth,
and nothing but the truth."
And we swear on the Bible and all this kind of thing,
but actually it's just a piece of propaganda.
You're lucky if something can be backed up by information--
And this is true of everything.
It doesn't matter, historically in terms of
historical texts and religion, everything.
We're only trying to piece together.
Absolutely.
And they are all filtered through the mind
of the authors of the day and their understanding,
their politics of the day and so forth,
and we can't really separate that.
Religious texts are not exempt from this.
Exactly, and my feeling about the Jesus story is that
that was possibly put together because a certain
kind of early Christian person needed facts,
they needed an actual history to pin things onto.
So they wanted to put it into a time and place that
they could relate to, that it made sense to them.
I mean there is evidence in the Bible and elsewhere
that the Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed in 660 A.D.
660 A.D., there's evidence of that and there are
references to the destruction of the Great Temple
in Jerusalem in the Bible.
So these kind of things you can kind of go with,
and the problem that they had is that, A, the Dead Sea
Scrolls are being translated by the Catholic Church.
A branch of them, Jesuits or whatever.
So they've got a clear reason,
a motive for not revealing certain information.
Cause after all everything could collapse
like a pack of cards if, and there's a story in
the Dead Sea Scrolls that can be correlated to tie
to events that happened around this spurious
time that Jesus was supposed to be alive.
And this is to do with the death of the righteous teacher by
the wicked priest and also events to do with the betrayer.
The Essenes are very worked up about the betrayer.
Now the background to those two things,
well first of all I should say that what the modern
day Jesuits have done is they've placed all
those stories into a much earlier time.
They said that it must be second century B.C.
but they have no historical, they have no reason,
no evidence for doing that.
It just suits their purposes to be able to do that.
But actually the death of the teacher by the wicked priest
can easily be referred to the so-called brother of Jesus
called James, who is pushed off the roof of the
temple by Jannaeus, the wicked priest.
That's kind of backed up in other information,
and the betrayer is Paul.
Now that's another whole really interesting story
that makes one very suspicious about this
whole origins of Christianity.
Yes well the thing about Paul is that
what's happening is you've got early Palestine,
the Romans are in occupation.
They haven't come up with the exact date when they've
invaded Palestine but they're controlling Palestine,
and what the Jewish priesthood in Jerusalem is very worried
about is calling the wrath of the Romans down upon them
and having their temple destroyed.
And they're very worried about having this hostile group
of Jews, the Essenes at Qumran on the Dead Sea.
And they're very worried about them stirring things up
because there's also a lot to do with the zealots,
who are these guerrilla warfare tactic people.
Like the IRA or whatever it is, terrorists.
And they're very concerned about this,
that if these people keep stirring it,
they will bring the wrath of the Romans down.
So what they did is they dispatched Paul.
Now the thing that's misled us is it says in
the Bible they sent him to Damascus.
Now the point about going to Damascus is Damascus is in
Syria, it's way out of the jurisdiction of the Jewish Temple
and also Damascus is possibly a code name for Qumran.
In the Dead Sea Scrolls they've got lots of references to
the Damascus code and scroll and all that kind of thing.
So if you actually take the view that Damascus
refers to Qumran, it makes sense.
And then what happens is that Paul comes to the Essenes,
and he's supposed to kind of talk them out of being
so religiously aggressive and hostile and wanting to get rid
of the Romans, who they refer to as the Kediaman.
And there's the war scrolls in the Dead Sea Scrolls,
very aggressive stuff and they want to fight
them and all this kind of stuff.
Anyway so he turns up at Qumran,
but instead of trying to argue against them and trying
to persuade them, he joins them and he becomes an
initiate and he goes off into the wildness and he may
even have gone as far as Petra, where they had a community,
and he becomes a novitiate, part of their whole thing.
And then after a bit while he's part of their community,
it takes two or three years for him to join,
he starts to argue with them about inviting new people
in and not wanting to have to apply the law to them.
Because one of the titles that the Essenes call themselves,
they call themselves like the brothers of righteousness.
They see themselves very much as protectors of the law,
this is very important to them.
And so he starts to set up his own communities
where you don't have to have been circumcised,
you don't have to have agreed to the law of the whole Jewish
thing and when he does that, they regard him as a betrayer.
They regard him as someone who's come into their community,
learned about all their practices,
joined them from the inside and then gone away,
and gone away arguing with them.
And that to them is an enormous betrayal of their trust.
So that's why in the Copper Scroll when it,
or in these scrolls when it describes the betrayer,
it makes sense that it's him and it fits into the timescale.
But there's no mention of Jesus in any of that,
that's the slight fly in the ointment.
So my way of thinking is is that as the whole Christian
story develops, Paul takes on a line of early monotheistic
thing because these Essenes are still very much
monotheistic, they are worshiping the sun as well.
They do their rituals to the sun when they get up
in the morning and that kind of thing and it's
still very much one God.
He's possibly following in a line that develops
into what we'd know as Gnosticism.
But there are others in this community, particularly Peter,
who are actually people who like facts,
and it's the followers from that side of things that start
to put together a story about when Jesus might have
existed and where he might have lived and how it
might have been and all of that.
Because we know that the earliest Gospels weren't
written until at least A.D. 70, so at least potentially
30, 40 years after Jesus would have died,
if that story were true.
So already there's enough of a generational time
for things to become very twisted and warped
and who knows exactly when.
And you were saying you wanted to
talk about John the Baptist.
Well the thing is John the Baptist,
when he was talking about the coming of Jesus,
he may have been talking about the second coming of Jesus
because the first coming of Jesus may well have
been this much earlier time, who knows?
Maybe way back in ancient Egypt, who knows?
And that John the Baptist was actually talking about
something quite different and seeing that there could've
been another time when he could have been incarnated.
There is also a view among certain groups that for example,
the early nativity story was actually to do with John
the Baptist and not to do with Jesus.
There are groups who think that that was all hijacked
and re-written to fit the Jesus story and that it's
actually all about John's early life.
And it's very interesting that one of the routes
through that we have back into all this is through
the Knights Templars much later on,
and we're talking about 12th, 13th century A.D.
But that those people themselves venerated John
rather than Jesus, that they had perhaps discovered
these old texts that gave the lie to all of this.
And they would refer to themselves as the Johnites
and his day was the day that they actually celebrated--
June 24th.
Yeah, exactly.
Because what we mustn't forget is that the date
of Jesus' birthday was decided by Pope,
I think it's Pope Liberius in 300-something A.D.
I can't remember the exact date,
but that date of the 25th of December was actually
the cult date of the birth of Mithras,
who is a whole other thing altogether.
So you know there we are--
You start going back into Babylonian texts, yes.
Yeah exactly, so there we are thinking that all this
Jesus story, it's true, it's there, you know nativity,
and all the rest of it but actually you've got an arbitrary
Pope deciding in the fourth century A.D.
when the birth date of Jesus was.
And think how many millions of Christians around the world
don't know that simple fact that it's actually the Catholic
Church who has decided when Jesus should be born.
Right, and as you say if you go back in prior,
several millennia back you start
seeing the same kind of story.
The same dates for the same story around the virgin
birth and so forth have already been documented.
Not documented,
but that's already part of the mythology or lore.
Yes, exactly.
I mean the problem that we have is that we can't separate
myth from reality because these people didn't write these
things down as if they were true historic documents.
They wrote them down as powerful stories.
I mean I don't want to take anything away from the wisdom,
the teachings, anything like that.
That is all, I have no quarrel with any of that.
The Christian religion in that sense to me is very
important and totally powerful and very true.
And his Sermons on the Mount,
all the very wise sayings of Jesus,
we should definitely listen to those.
That is a very, very powerful message.
I don't wish to take anything away from the message
of Jesus but I think the very fact that the historical
facts around him are so easy to query.
Have been made convenient.
Have been made convenient, and they're so dubious.
And it's the fact that people,
to me what that speaks of is people's need for a
psychological construct, for something in their heads.
It's people's need to believe that's the worrying thing
and that's the bit I feel very, I want to argue with that.
I feel very questioning of that because
why do you need to believe these spurious facts?
For example the Gnostic gospels which were
buried at Nag Hammadi in about 300-something A.D.,
they make no references to any historical facts
to do with Jesus, they only dwell on his teachings.
And that is at the end of the day what
we should all be looking at,
not tying ourselves down to rituals or Stations
of the Cross and all of that kinda thing.
Right.
That doesn't get us anywhere.
No, and there's something that you wrote about.
Something to me I found very interesting,
and this will bridge from the Egyptian times into what
we've really come to be now and I'd like you to just put
what you'd like to it, but I'm going to read from your book.
Oh, right.
So this is on page 213 and this is
part of the Hermetica's prophecy.
And this part I thought it just really spoke to me
and maybe just set up the Hermetica,
just set it up prior to my reading this prophecy.
If you'll set up who the being was
and where this prophecy came from.
Where the Hermetica, how that developed?
Well that's kind of difficult,
difficult to say exactly how the Hermetica developed
because obviously some of that's written in Greek,
so it's what the Greeks were told.
But I mean it's supposed to be the teaching of
Hermes Trismegistus and he's talking to his pupils,
that's really how it kind of come about but
the actual origins are very difficult to say.
Okay that's fine, just a little background.
So this says that the Hermetica's prophecy
continued with these words.
"People" and this is when the change,
when Egypt would fall, the Egyptian culture would fall and
would be replaced with something new which was Roman, right.
So, "At this time people will not cherish this entire world,
a work of God beyond compare,
they will prefer shadows to light and they
will find death more expedient than life.
No one will look up to Heaven."
I-E the sun and stars.
"The reverent will be thought mad and the irreverent wise.
The lunatic will be thought brave and the
scoundrel will be taken for a decent person.
Soul," and this is to me very important,
"Soul and all teachings about soul will be considered
not simply laughable but even illusory."
Now what happened that took us from what we
had previously known in these very high, advanced,
sophisticated cultures, spiritually as well,
to where we are now?
And you're talking about a bit of the story
but if you could just now draw a line.
Yeah, well in terms of how that came about,
I mean the thing that's amazing about Egypt is how
it's so consistent over such a long period of time.
I mean literally thousands of years,
that they sustained this amazing advanced
civilization for such a long period.
But then what happens is that Egypt becomes weakened,
particularly by big environmental disasters.
And the one that I identify I think as particularly key
is what I think is usually commonly accepted is that
shift from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age,
which happens at about 1200 B.C.
It's symbolized by the fall of Troy,
which is on the edge of Turkey.
And it's at that point that there's possibly a volcano
in Iceland that blew up, the Hekla volcano,
and that caused 20 years of famine.
So when you get these enormous environmental stresses,
stuff happens, bad stuff happens.
In particular people go on the march looking for food
and at that point they'd discovered the secret of iron,
which hadn't been known before that.
They didn't use iron, they only used bronze,
which is this alloy of copper and tin.
And so they were better-armed this time and Egypt
manages to keep them out for quite a long time,
Egypt's really a closed country a bit
like China and Japan used to be.
And the Indo-European tribes in particular were
very much on the move and in about 600 B.C.
the Persians are the first to invade,
but they don't have a lot of impact on Egypt.
The rituals still carry on in the Oasis,
they still carry on their work.
But it is definitely a weakening and it's after
that that the Greeks start to come,
they invade properly with Alexander the Great in 333 B.C.
The Romans are very keen to get into Egypt.
They want to know their secrets,
they want to have access to all this knowledge
and they don't actually get there until 30 B.C.
around Cleopatra and Antony.
So that is, it's at that point these Indo-European
tribes arriving in these stages in Egypt.
People who don't fully understand,
who aren't given access to the secrets because
in particular part of the secrets is this knowledge
of how to move the big stones.
Yes.
Advanced technology, yes.
Yes I mean they can move these big stones 500
miles from Aswan up to Giza along the Nile.
You know things that weigh, I don't know 50 tons.
I mean huge things and as a friend of mine said,
"Well if they had all this technology how come they
just didn't drop it on their heads when the Romans arrived?"
The point is the reason why that didn't happen is
because by the time the Romans arrived in Egypt,
there were no Egyptians there, they were Greeks.
Right.
The Greeks, the Ptolemies, they were ruling Egypt
but the difference between Alexander the Great
and your usual conqueror is that he invaded
Egypt because he loved it.
He wanted to know more about Egypt,
so he was responsible for creating Alexandria,
the city and the great library.
He wanted to bring all the knowledge from
the ancient world into this place and he wanted
to become more Egyptian than Greek.
But nevertheless,
they still weren't given access to all the secrets.
The secrets, they didn't totally die out but they went
very much underground and they went elsewhere,
and they were kind of encapsulated in something
that we refer to as alchemy.
I mean I can talk to you about that if you want
but it's quite another deep subject really,
and that's what disappeared really.
And so yes they were in Egypt,
but they were only really there superficially.
And an awful lot of the building that you
see in Egypt today is actually Greek.
Even though it looks Egyptian, it's actually Greek,
it's the Ptolemies.
And then it's really just a question of how much they
understood as to how much we understand.
Which is fascinating because that
really brings us back to the present,
which is a lot of that knowledge is now surfacing.
Yes.
From underground sources and from within
the collective body of memory of those who may be
incarnating now who were there at that time.
So these technological mysteries are being revealed
and they're being, as far as we understand,
even utilized within elements and arms
of the various militaries around the world.
But cloaked and kept away from
the people's view for the time being.
So it's back and it will be continuing to surface throughout
as our knowledge continues to surface within us,
our memory continues to surface.
But the thing is is it has to be done from the heart
and that's the problem is that these are very powerful
things and that's what the Egyptians took so seriously,
was their responsibility not to allow this knowledge
to fall into the wrong hands.
Because if it didn't come from the heart and
it wasn't pure and meant in the right way
then it really couldn't be revealed.
And we're still too much I think gripped in a Roman mindset,
in a left-brain way of looking at the world.
It's still too powerful that really for the
full knowledge to be revealed.
Absolutely.
But on the other hand, sadly, it already has been co-opted
by the very forces that really shouldn't have control of it.
But as you say, not fully understood yet.
Only to a certain extent, otherwise it probably
would have been utilized, and poorly by now.
So we can kind of thank goodness for that.
And you know in a funny way the skeptics save us
because the skeptics need proof and when you
want to do something very extraordinary,
their lack of belief overrides it all and it doesn't happen.
Yes, it's true.
They'll never get to it.
It cannot be proven in the light of
that kind of mental influence even.
Yes, absolutely.
Yeah anything alchemical, which is beautiful.
So there is a fail-safe in there.
There is, it's their own skepticism. (laughs)
So excuse me. (coughs)
Any final thought Lucy, from this point?
I mean we'll just encourage people to get
a copy of the book and read it for themselves
because there's just so much more,
we've only skipped along just a couple
of strands of thought in this book.
Anything regarding this conversation that
you'd like to wrap it up with?
Well I think the thing is is that really
we must take the past more seriously.
The past has had so much to teach us.
We need to approach it with greater respect
and in particular the thing that they really
understood was a more holistic view of things.
They were right-brained,
well they were both left and right-brained.
They could integrate both sides of their brains
and so they worked with their intuition
and they worked with their reason.
Neither thing was more important than the other.
They understood how to connect subjective with objective
and all of those paradoxes that we don't understand fully,
cause we are taught to value scientific objective
more highly than the intuitive.
But you need both and my book writes
about that very clearly.
This need to integrate and the importance of that.
So I think if we go back to the ancient past and we
realize that the story we've told ourselves isn't true.
That we actually go, "Hang on a minute,
what really did happen?"
And we look at it again with greater respect, then we
can start to reveal to ourselves what really did happen.
And the fact that scientific knowledge for example,
didn't come out of experimentation,
it was directly-accessed information.
And when people can understand that,
then they can approach modern,
I mean what I'm talking about is shamanic ritual,
shamanism, we haven't talked about that today
but you know that's another conversation.
But they can approach modern-day shaman with more
respect and think, "We can learn from these people."
Not just treat them as anthropological curiosities that's
something that's wild and happens in the jungles of Peru,
that these are people who really have powerful
messages for us and we should be listening.
Because the earth is at a critical time and we all need
to come together and we need to look after our planet
so that we can continue to live here.
But with truth and beauty,
that's the thing that's really key.
And really my book is just part of a message to say,
"Look again, take another look and have respect
and think of life in a different way."
Don't go for this end justifies the means,
which is the Roman way of thinking which is still
very much present in corporate America and all of that.
But look at it as the ends are part of the means and the
means are part of the end and we are interconnected,
we are part of the land and the land is part of us,
not it's just there for us to exploit for our own purposes.
And that's really my message is that we need to
think about it and put it into that context,
reconnect with the ancient past.
Beautifully said and thank you so much
for your time and for your hospitality,
we're out here on, how much land do you have here?
A couple a hundred acres.
Couple hundred acres and we--
Old England.
Old England and very little--
Oak trees, 600 year old oak trees.
Yes, I got to commune with your oak
trees yesterday, which I love ancient oaks,
and wake up to the sound of your cows in the morning.
Thank you for putting us up,
this has been a wonderful journey for us as well.
It's my privilege too, thank you for coming.
You can find a copy of "Approaching Chaos"
on Amazon and other major book sellers.
On similar topics you might also enjoy my interviews
with William Henry, Jose Arguedas, and Walter Cruttenden.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(up-temp drumbeat)